Intro
Building a data enti platform is really
fun but at the end you don't do it for
fun you do it to solve a business
problem. So after you have built your
medallion architecture after you have
created your gold level tables you want
to make the output accessible for your
business and there are different ways
how you can do that within databicks. If
you simply want to build reports and
expose them to your business users, you
can do that within databicks using the
builtin AIBI dashboarding
functionalities. If that is not enough
for you and you want to have more
flexibility in accessing the data, you
could also build a genie space within
data bricks that lets you chat with your
data in natural language. And if you
want to build a custom web application
to include even more interactivity and
to also have more flexibility on the
actual layouts, on the designs, on the
visualizations, you could build a custom
datab bricks app for that purpose. In
this video, we will look into all of
those free options that I just mentioned
and we will implement them hands-on.
This is actually the last part of an end
to end databicks project we are working
on. So if you want to know all the
context around this use case and about
the data that we pre-processed the
machine learning model that we trained
then check out the last couple of
videos. And now let's dive right into
data bricks. There we go. We are back in
AI/BI Dashboards
data bricks before we start building our
consuming applications. Let's have a
quick look into our catalog and the
structure currently. So we built within
the last couple of videos, if you're
following the full series, we have built
this smart claims dev catalog. We have
the landing schema. We have the bronze
schema where we transformed all the data
we need into the delta format. Then we
have the silver one where we cleaned
this data and where we performed some
data quality checks. And then we have
the gold schema where we have our
aggregated data and our joint data ready
for use by business applications. And we
have our machine learning model which we
trained in the last part to
automatically classify the severity of
car crashes. As I mentioned in the
intro, there are many ways to consume
this data now and we will mainly focus
on dashboards on Genie spaces as well as
on databicks apps. Let's start with the
dashboards. So to create a new dashboard
within databicks, we just go over here
to dashboards and then we click on
create dashboard. And that's already it.
We can go ahead and get started. We get
some instructions how to go about a new
dashboard. And we call this claims
investigation. And we already get the
instructions right here. So first thing
we would need to do is to add some data
that is powering this dashboard. So
let's do this. And basically what we do
here is based on the tables that we have
already created previously based on the
for example gold tables that are already
registered in the unity catalog we can
now do some queries on top and use this
then for a visualization in the
dashboard. So let's select here our
catalog and one of the schemas and here
we start with this example. So we are
accessing the smart claims dev gold
schema and we use this claim insights
table that we produced in the last
episode and all we do here is we are
counting the incident severity by the
type. Right? Now you see we added some
parameters right here for the start and
the end date. so that we can do this
dynamic. And let me quickly edit this
and make this a date. And same for this
one. That's also a date. And now we can
for example specify the 1st of January
here for the start date. And for the end
date, we can specify basically today,
right? And then we can run this query
and check out the results right here. So
this is just a normal SQL query that we
created right here. And then we create
this data set for the dashboard. And
this one we can for example call claims
summary. And now we can go back to the
dashboard. And here we can actually
visualize it right. We can add a new
visualization right over here. We can
now either click everything together for
us. So we can select the data set that
we just created, right? The claim
summary. This is the only one we have so
far. And now I could manually basically
select the visualization the x-axis
yaxis color and so on and so forth. Or
what I could also do is it is already
even giving me this as a suggest
suggestion the incident types
distribution. And this is actually what
I want to do here. And then it
automatically goes ahead and creates a
visualization for me. I could um further
adjust that and say, okay, I don't want
to have a pie chart. I actually want to
have a bar chart. I could make it the
other way around. And then I could also
do the coloring better by specifying
here that I want to have colors for the
actual severity right here. And yeah, I
could further customize this also for
the coloring. And this is like a fully
functional BI solution that you see
right here. It's natively built into
data bricks. You don't need like a
separate license for any other BI tool.
You can just do it right into here. And
it also recently added quite a lot of
new features. So we can also now set
things like general themes right here.
For example, we can do the dark mode,
light mode, uh switch. Now this is what
I have done already previously. And this
is what you can see right over here. So
I have created this dashboard with lots
more visualizations based on our tables
that we created within data bricks and
this gives us basically an overview
about our whole claims that we analyzed
within data bricks and yeah now I have
this dashboard which is great. So it
shows me an overview of all the claims
that have been already processed, right?
It can also show me like outputs of my
machine learning model for example. But
for this we will use the data bricks
apps in a second. But what else can we
AI/BI Genie
do? Right? So we have this more or less
static dashboard that is typically
created by certain personas within your
organization. And if you are a business
user, maybe this answers most of your
questions, but maybe you would like to
know something specific that is not
covered yet by this dashboard. Now, what
you would have to do is reach out back
to your data analysts, data engineers,
and so on to include this into this
dashboard, right? Maybe the data is not
even there yet. Maybe there needs to be
some some data transformations first.
Maybe it is already there, but it just
takes time to create the visualization.
This is where databicks genie comes into
play. Genie is basically databicks
managed solution to do text to SQL. So
if we go ahead over here and we create a
new genie space and the first thing we
do is we connect it to our data sets. In
this case we could select our claim
insights table for example. Maybe we
could also select our claim rules that
we created earlier. where we can select
the claims, the customers, telematics
information, all of that and then create
the genie space. And now we can
basically go ahead and ask questions in
natural language to our genie space. And
Genie will convert this into a SQL
statement and then execute it on a SQL
warehouse. So it already provides me
some sample questions that I could ask
based on my input data set. Maybe we say
like, give me an overview of how many
claims were classified
with the different severity types. And
there we go. We got a response. So, we
see like for total loss, we have 1,200
claims. For um trivial damage, it's just
about 397 in our data set, right? And
you can even look at the code and see
what Genie did. And in this case, it's a
fairly simple query, but you could also
ask way more complex things and Genie
would figure out what kind of query to
apply. Also, how to join the different
tables if you added proper metadata into
your Unity catalog. If you also added
like primary key and foreign key
constraints, for example, it would be
capable also of figuring out how to do
more complex joints on the data set and
then give you the output right here. And
it can also do visualizations. All
Apps
right, this was basically the second
possibility how to consume the data
within data bricks. And now maybe the
most exciting one is to build a
databicks app. For this, we go to the
compute tab right over here and we click
into apps. And first of all, before we
look at the app that I already created
beforehand for this use case, maybe
let's look at the options if we start
from zero. So we create the app right
here and then we get a bunch of
different options for different
frameworks. So for example, we could
create a streamlit app and we get a
template for a data app, an interactive
data app, for an OTP database app for
example and so for the different
frameworks we get different options
here. To start with a simple example,
let's choose streamllet and let's choose
data app right here. And as a next step,
we can provide different resources that
the app will use. The resources right
here are the different resources within
data bricks that the app can then use to
for example use a SQL warehouse to write
a query or push down a query on top of
your data set. So for this easy app,
there is only the SQL warehouse as an
option. If you would build like a custom
app for example and um maybe let's
quickly see how this looks like. Here we
can add way more resources, right? So
here we can add not only a SQL
warehouse, we can add a serving endpoint
for example to easily access our machine
learning model endpoint that we created.
We can also add a database which is an
OOLTP database that we will also look
into in a second and therefore we can
link our different resources within data
bricks so that the app can very easily
access. Now let's go back to the simple
example where we wanted to create a
streamlit data app and we select our SQL
warehouse. We click on next, next and
install. Now we wait a couple of minutes
for the app to actually deploy and then
we can access it. Now the app is
running. So if we click into it, we will
see how a sample app could look like. We
authorize it and there we go. This is
like a sample app and how it could look
like. So here we have some input fields
to predict the fair on some sample taxi
data set, right? And it's just like um a
web app now that we can use. We can
expose it internally in our company and
um basically build on top of this
template. Cool. Now we have seen the
simple example. Now let's look into the
app that I have built already for our
use case which is deployed right here.
First of all, maybe before we look into
the app, let's quickly check out the
resources right here because here it's a
bit more advanced compared to what we
have seen so far. So in this case, I
have not only the SQL warehouse, but I
have also a Postgress database and a
serving endpoint. So you may be
wondering about this database right
here. So maybe let's quickly look into
this and then we check out the actual
app. So what I have done is I have
created within databicks a lakebase
database instance and this is something
that was just recently announced and is
currently in public preview. In this
compute tab you can create an OOLTP
database right here and this is what I
have done. This is a posgress database
and it's a relational database. And the
reason I have built this is because if
you're building web applications, you
often would like to have a smooth user
experience where the different data
assets load very quickly. The problem is
if we go always through the SQL
warehouse to access our data to for
example visualize some customer
information or claim information you
would always have some kind of latency
because the SQL warehouse is more of an
analytical compute option right it's
operating on an object store and with
data that is in a columner format right
in in Delta and parket this is where we
would typically in applications use a
relational database for and And this is
um why I created this OLTP database
right here. And then what I can do here
is I can go to my catalog. I can go to
one of my tables. In this case, I'm
choosing the customer claim policy
teleatics table as this is the one that
I would like to access from my front
end. And I create a synced table out of
it. And sync table means I create a
posgress table out of my delta table.
For this I specify the name. I just name
it exactly like this. But I put also
lake base uh right over here. Then I
select the database instance. And then I
choose the primary key which is the
claim number in this case. And then I
click on create. And there we go. The
sync is completed. And we also see this
is now a synced table which means this
is a lakebase table that we created
right here. So out of our delta table
that could be accessed from the SQL
warehouse we created a relational
database table a posgress table and now
we can in our app go right to the
lakebased database and access this table
with very low latency and just quickly
extract some kind of info out of that.
To show you how this looks like, we can
also here basically query this uh
lakebased database using the posgress
editor right inside data brick. So you
see here at the top now we are connected
to to posgress not not the SQL server
anymore and we can run queries on top
and there we go. We get the results
super fast and this is now really going
through the Postgress database and not
through the SQL warehouse anymore. And
this is what I have implemented in my
app as well. So now we can finally maybe
click into it and see what I have built
here. We open it up right over here. And
there we go. So this is the app that I
have built for this specific use case.
As you can see at the top here, it has
two different modes basically. It has
the customer mode which we are in
currently as well as the admin mode. The
customer mode is basically to mimic or
to give you an idea how the claim
submission process could look like for
this use case. So the idea is the
customer logs into this portal or it
could also be an app basically and then
they submit their claims right here. And
this is what we're going to do now. And
then we have the admin mode and this we
will see afterwards. This is basically
for internal use our app that we could
use to further analyze all of the
claims, all of the severities for our
internal people basically to review all
of the claims that did not pass all of
those out of the box checks that we
perform. So now let's upload an image of
Encar damage, right? Let's choose one of
the the major ones. Let's choose maybe
this one right here. This is a major
damage here. So hopefully also our
machine learning model should classify
this properly. You also see here on the
bottom right that we get this popup and
this is what I implemented basically. So
just now we did the inference on this
image that I uploaded and we saw it's it
was classified as as major right and
then um here I provide some more
information before I can submit the
claim. So here let's put maybe 2222 as
the policy number. We put in the
accident location. So here maybe let's
put in Munich. Um we specify the claim
amount. So in this case maybe this was a
full crash as you have seen in the
image. Maybe we we say okay it's like
30,000 accident date. Let's say it
happened today. And then for the self
assessed severity. So this is what I as
a customer think this claim is. And here
I would put major damage, right? And we
already saw basically that our machine
learning model thinks the same. Now we
add a collision type. For this one, we
put multi vehicle. We say they were um
free vehicles involved. We can put some
additional notes. And now I can
basically submit. Now what happens? It's
processing the claim. And there we go.
This was quite fast. We already get the
information that our claim has been
approved. And what happened under the
hood? It performed several checks here.
So it checked the image severity, used
our machine learning model to compare
the selfassessed severity by the
customer with the prediction from our
machine learning model. We checked the
policy amount. So those 30,000 that we
inputed, this is still within the policy
of the specific customer. We made sure
that the policy date is still valid and
we even performed a speed check based on
the teleatics data to make sure that
this customer was not driving too fast.
And therefore, we completely
automatically reviewed this claim and
already give the information you will
receive your refund within 3 to five
business days. Now, let's copy the claim
number right here because now we will
switch to the admin mode. And the admin
mode is built as I mentioned for
internal usage to further analyze the
different claims. We we see here we have
the overview and the analysis tab. In
the overview tab first of all we get an
overview about the total claims and then
also how many were like a major damage,
how many were like a minor damage and so
on and so forth. We can even filter here
by severity type for example. And this
will also filter our claims list that we
see right here. And this is just an
overview for us to see. Okay, I have
these many claims with a minor damage
for example. And I see the status of the
different claims. So this is what I
could implement within my company. All
the claims that do not pass this out of
the box checks, they will become under
review. And then I know, okay, I should
check all the claims that do not pass
those out of the box checks. And then I
could log in here as an employee and I
could further investigate the different
claims. Now on the analysis tab, if we
click over here, we see even more
details for each of the different
claims. So here one of the the claims is
pre-selected for a customer called Zims.
We see the different severity checks for
each of the different claims. So we see
again the the severity matches. Um we
see the accident image uploaded by the
customer here. It matches what our
machine learning model predicted. In
this case for this claim it's it's also
all fine. So it was within the limit.
The policy is fine. The speed check was
fine. Now we could also search for the
claim that we have just submitted. Let's
do this. And you see this is the image
that we uploaded. And you see again that
we passed all checks. And this way I
could analyze all of my claims. I would
specifically look out for the claims
that do not match that do have some
problems right here. So in this case
it's all super nice. Um but in other
cases I would maybe have a severity
mismatch. I would have a policy amount
that is over the amount that is allowed
right and maybe an a policy that is not
even um valid any cool. And that was it.
That was all I wanted to show you for
the databicks apps part. And I hope you
enjoyed it. And yeah, that's pretty cool
and quite flexible what we can build
here with datab bricks apps. All right,
Outro
and that's already it. In this video, we
have seen different options how we can
consume the data that we produced and
the machine learning models. We have
seen how we can build dashboards with
AIBI dashboarding functionality. We have
seen how we can also speak with our data
in natural language using Genie. And
then we actually saw also how we can
really build apps inside datab bricks
that use our different resources that
can use our SQL warehouse that can use a
lakebased database and that can also use
a model serving endpoint to build really
custom interactive apps that can be used
in my organization to serve different
kind of use cases and make the data more
accessible. I hope you enjoyed the video
and the whole series.