Intro
Data transformations or ETL pipelines
are one of the core capabilities of
every data and AI platform. For big data
in particular, Apache Spark is the go-to
framework for distributed data
processing and the databicks founders
are actually the original creators of
Apache Spark. Therefore, obviously,
Databicks is a great platform to run
your Spark code to transform your data
across the Medallion architecture. Now
to make data processing pipelines
easier, more reliable and also more
performant, databicks a few years ago
introduced an ETL framework called Delta
Life Tables which has recently been open
sourced as part of the Apache Spark
project and it also got a rename to
LakeFlow declarative pipelines or Spark
declarative pipelines as well as some
major updates within the framework
itself. In my opinion, declarative
pipelines offer the following major
benefits. First of all, they unify batch
and stream processing as they provide
this declarative interface to write your
pipelines. So you can easily switch
batch and streaming whenever your
requirements change. Additionally, you
get data quality functionalities right
built into the framework and declarative
pipelines are really built for
incremental processing. So it becomes
super easy to write those pipelines
where you always only propagate your
incremental new data changes throughout
your whole pipeline and you can also do
things like change data capture and
slowly changing dimensions with just a
few lines of code. After you've
implemented your data processing
pipeline, you probably want to
orchestrate everything. And for this
databicks offers lakeflow jobs which was
previously known as workflows to
orchestrate your whole pipeline to put a
schedule on top of it to define triggers
job parameters and much more. In this
video we will use lakeflow declarative
pipelines to build our silver and gold
tables by implementing pipelines to
clean the data to apply some data
quality checks and then to join it to
make it ready for consumption by
downstream applications. This is the
fourth part of an end to end data bricks
project. So check out the first three
parts if you're interested where we
ingested data from a SQL server also
streaming data from a message bus as
well as from the object store. Now let's
jump right into databicks and get
started. All right, let's go. Here we
Data Quality & Cleaning - Silver Layer
are within databicks and as always let's
quickly check our catalog structure. We
are still operating in the smart claims
deaf catalog if you have watched the
previous videos and today we will be
mainly focusing on the silver and the
gold schema as we are building the
cleaning transformations as well as the
aggregations. So let's quickly check
maybe again what we have already here
within the landing schema. We have all
the volumes right. So here we have the
volumes that were created by our
ingestion gateway to ingest the SQL
server data as well as the volumes that
we created to upload the images. And
then in browse we created all those
different tables for the claims for the
claim images for the customers policy
teleatics and all of that was ingested
in the previous parts. And now we would
like to transform this data. We would
like to clean it and we want to put it
into a structure so that we can consume
it by downstream applications and for
this we will clean the tables and put it
into the silver one which is currently
empty and then we will also have this
gold schema where we will put the
aggregated data into. Now for this we
would need to write some code and for
that we will again create some lakeflow
declarative pipelines. So we click on
new ETL pipeline right here. This time
we call it transformations
and then we select our catalog and the
default schema this time should be maybe
the the silver one and we will again use
the new lakeflow pipelines editor and
for now let's start with an empty file.
Now let's give this some structures.
Let's create some separate files for the
different stages. We will create two new
files for bronze to silver and for
silver to gold. Now let's start with the
actual implementation of the browse to
silver pipelines. For this first of all
we will import some functions as well as
defining our catalog brows schema and
silver schema as we will refer to this
several times within this file. By the
way, this could be also later on
abstracted away into pipeline
configurations. But for now, let's just
hardcode it uh right into here. And now
we can start cleaning our data. And
let's start maybe with the claims data
set. To do that, let's maybe quickly
first open a new tab to have a quick
look into the data set. Right? So we
query from the browse claim table and
then we see how it currently looks like.
It is already in a quite clean state.
But what we see here for example, we
have lots of dates inside here like the
license issue date and they are actually
in string format. So we would like to
convert them into date format. And this
is one of the typical cleaning
operations that you do from bronze to
silver. And then we would also like to
do some data quality checks to uh make
sure that very important columns such as
the claim number for example they are
not zero right they have a specific
value and then we could also apply some
other checks on the other columns using
the builtin data quality functionalities
within the declarative pipelines. So
let's do that. So we paste here our
initial code. This is just defining
again the name of the table. In this
case we will put it into the silver
schema. We will call it exactly the same
as we call it in the bronze schema. So
again it's just called claim but this
time in the silver schema. We will set
some table properties to enhance the
metadata right here. And now we will add
our data quality checks. And for this we
can leverage this builtin data quality
functionalities within the declarative
pipelines. So what we do here for now we
could add much more here but we will
just focus on two quality checks for now
per table and for this claim table we
check two things right. First of all
this is the syntax how you create those
data quality checks within the
declarative pipelines. So you just
specify right before the table
definition you specify expect all for
example if you have multiple checks and
in this case I am defining two data
quality checks and then here I specify
the actual logic that is used to perform
this data quality check. So here it's
super simple. I'm just saying claim
number is not null. And then I have a
second check checking for the valid
incident hour. Right? We have this
column called incident hour. And I just
want to make sure it's between 0 and 23
to make sure this is not some weird
number that does not make sense. So now
you might be wondering, okay, what if
one of those data quality checks right
here is not passing, right? So what if I
have a claim number that is indeed a
null or what if I have an incident hour
that is maybe 45 right the default
behavior as I just specified here expect
all is to give me a warning right I will
see later on in the user interface there
were several records maybe out of the
thousand records that I ingested maybe
10 of those did not pass this data
quality check and then I will see
visually as a warning, right? But maybe
that's not enough. Maybe I want to have
different actions based on the results
of these data quality checks. So what I
could do here as well is instead of
saying expect all, which just would give
me the warning, I could also say expect
all or drop. So actually for those
records that do not pass these data
quality checks, now it would drop the
record out of the target table. And this
is most likely what we would like to
achieve for most of the use cases. There
is one more alternative that we could
do. So instead of saying expect all or
drop, we could also say expect all or
fail. So now if one of the records of my
source table does not pass one of those
two data quality checks, then it would
fail the whole pipeline. If I would want
to make sure okay if any of my input
records something is not passing those
two checks then maybe I don't want to
continue at all I I first want to fix on
my source system what the problem may be
then you could also specify this
behavior right here for our use case we
go by expect or drop for now and now we
can go ahead and specify what we would
like to check so first of all we are
reading in our brows table right here,
right? Performing a read stream
operation and then we are returning this
browse table with a couple of
modifications on top and these are our
data quality checks that we perform
right here. So if we make this a bit
bigger you can see for this table our
main transformations are adjusting the
date format and this is also very
typical. Also in a lot of the cleaning
pipelines, you often mainly do some data
quality checks plus you do some data
type transformations to put everything
into proper data formats that you expect
down the road. So here we are making
those transformations on three different
columns on the claim date on the
incident date as well as on the license
issue date. And as all of them have a
slightly different date format, you see
here that I specify. Okay, in this case
for the incident date, it looks like
this currently. And for the license
issue date, it's like the other format
that you can see right here. The rescue
date is something we got out of our
first ingestion pipeline if you have
followed the last video when we used
autoloader. And here we are dropping
this for our silver table. Now before we
add all the other data quality checks
for the other pipelines, let us quickly
run this and see what the outcome looks
like especially with our data quality
checks that we apply now. There we go.
The pipeline is being executed and we
should see the results in a second.
There we go. So now we have created our
silver table. We can have a look into it
and look at the preview tab of this
lakeflow declarative pipelines. And now
you see already here the icon. And also
if we hover over it, you see the claim
date is now a proper date format. And
what we could also do is we could go
back right here in this overview. And
then we could have also a look here into
the expectations column. If we click
into this, we see an overview of our
data quality checks that we performed.
So we see in this case 100% of the
source records were written into the
target table. So all of those quality
checks passed. Basically none of my rows
that have an unvalid claim number or an
incident hour. So nothing was dropped.
But if I would have some records right
here, I would see them right in this
overview and they would not appear in my
cleaned silver table right here. All
right. Now let's repeat what we have
done for this claim table also for all
of our other tables. I will not go into
the detail for all of those. I will just
show you some other common data cleanup
steps for the other tables as well. So
now let's maybe continue with the policy
table as this is also very
straightforward here. I will just copy
over all the code. So again it's super
straightforward. All we do here is we
are checking for a valid policy number.
And here we we don't have a date that we
would like to clean. But here what we do
is with this premium column that we have
right here. So this one does have like
um values that could be negative. But in
the clean version I would always like to
have only the positive values. So I'm
applying this absolute function right
here to um from the negative records
also store the the positive records in
this in this table. Now maybe let's also
have a look into our customer cleanup
operations. Here we are doing a few more
things. So if I just paste this right
here again going quickly from the top to
to the bottom. I perform a check on the
customer ID. Then I read the browse
table right here. Actually for the
customer I have this name column which
is having the first name as well as the
last name which I would like to split
here. So I'm performing some
transformation logic right here to
basically get the first name and the
last name out of this one big string. So
if we check it out very quickly and
query the bronze customer table. This is
what I was referring to right currently
in the bronze version we have only this
name column where we put the first name
and the last name. So here maybe we
would like to split this and this is
exactly what we are doing in our
cleaning pipeline. On top of this, for
the date of birth column in the customer
table, we again transform the data type
to get a proper date right here. And
then I'm also doing some clean up on the
actual address column right here. All
right. Now, I will also paste all the
other transformations that we do all the
other cleanup operations. I will put all
of the code into a git repository after
this whole series so that you can have a
detailed look in each and every of those
table transformations. But yeah, for all
of them it's really very similar. We're
doing this data quality check. We are
adjusting the actual data types of the
columns and then maybe for some specific
tables we also apply some logic to do
further cleanups. So let's not forget
about our image tables. So here we also
doing some some cleanup operations on
the claim images as well as on the
training images. Now we have put this
all together and we can again maybe run
the pipeline and now you also see the
graph will become a bit bigger as we
have now lots of tables that we create
right here and there we go. So we were
super fast we created all of these
tables right here all of our silver
tables. Now if we would move basically
our ingestion pipelines that we have
built in the last parts in the last
videos we could also see uh the full
graph right over here right but for now
let's continue like this and we will
anyways later in the unity catalog
lineage see the end to end flow of the
tables coming from the source system and
then being transformed into bronze into
silver and now into gold as well and
gold is what we going to look into next
Right. So now all of these tables are
mainly streaming tables that we have
created. And now we would also like to
create a couple of materialized views
actually to have those pre-join tables
that we can then consume by a BI tool
for example by PowerBI by databicks AIBI
dashboards or even from our custom
downstream applications. for this to
better structure it. Let's do it in this
Data Aggregation - Gold Layer
other file right here. Again, we are
importing a bunch of things. And we are
specifying our gold schema right here.
And now we can go ahead and create our
transformations. So let's start with a
super simple one which is the aggregated
teleatics. Here we are now reading from
the silver table that we have just
created in the other file. And now we
are basically aggregating we are
grouping by this chess number and then
we are aggregating on the speed and then
we're also averaging this this location
where the actual speed was recorded
right and this is this is quite typical
for streaming data you have lots of
small records and most of the time for
your actual analytical analysis you
don't need those super fine granular
records right for telemetics it could be
that every second or something It
captures 10 different records of the
speed of the the latitude, the
longitude. So often you aggregate here,
you put an average and maybe you say
okay uh in this 10second time frame
there was this kind of speed in this
kind of location. Now we would also like
to pre-join some of the tables that we
have to create materialized views that
are basically pre-joined tables and
whenever something is changing in one of
the silver tables it will just
incrementally update this materialized
view. Right? So here if we create this
new table in this case it's a customer
claim and policy join and if we update
our silver customer table for example it
will not recomputee this whole target
table it will only update our
materialized view based on the new
customer record we are by the way
putting here as table properties gold
for all of our gold tables and here
again it's a super simple pipeline. So
we're just reading in the cleaned policy
claim and customer from our silver layer
and then we perform this uh join right
here. We are first joining the claims
with the policy and then we return the
full join also including the customer
information right here. Now let's create
one final table right here because you
see here we have now this table having
the customer claim and policy
information and then we would like to
have one final table that actually also
includes the teleatics information. For
this we create this very long name here
customer claim policy teleatics table
and again we're reading in the table
that we just created right here. So the
customer claim policy table and what we
do here is we are joining it with the
aggregated telemetics data. All right.
As I mentioned all the code will be
uploaded to GitHub so you can have a
detailed look. And now let's also
execute this part here so that we have
the gold tables created as well. Maybe
also to show you one more thing. So you
see here now this pipeline failed as I
don't have this geopy library installed
on the serverless cluster. So to fix
this what I have to do basically is I
have to go into my settings. I have to
go into the environment right here and
then then I need to add this dependency
to also include this custom library into
our serverless cluster. So I can just
put here this version for example. I
save it and then I reexecute it and then
now it should all work. There we go. The
run successfully completed now and we
see here our full graph on the right
hand side. Again, this is missing the
the brows tables because we did not put
them in here yet. Um otherwise it would
show the whole end to end graph. But for
now we already see okay we created those
different tables and you also see the
input tables are mainly streaming tables
that we have right here. So those
optimized delta tables produced by lake
for declarative pipelines for very high
performant input. And then we have on
the next layer is mainly materialized
views that we use for example to have
this joint customer claim policy
telemetics table. And again, this will
help us to only incrementally
reprocess this table whenever new
records come in. Awesome. Now, let's
maybe also quickly check the Unity
catalog. And then afterwards, we
actually bring everything into a proper
pipeline that we orchestrate and that we
schedule from time to time. Now, back in
the Unity catalog, we click into our
silver and gold schema right here. And
now we see all of those tables were
created right there. And we can go ahead
and what we can also do now as in our
lakeflow declarative pipeline that we
just implemented we did not see the full
lineage because we were building this in
separate uh parts and in separate
pipelines basically but now within the
unity catalog if we click into the
lineage for example let's take this
target table right here. So now if we
click into the lineage right here, we
see those tables that were created, but
then we also could potentially see the
the browse tables right here as well.
And this is all created for you
automatically. And you can even check
this on a column level. So if you click
into one of the columns within a table,
you will see exactly where it came from
and where it went to. Cool. Now let's
Orchestration
orchestrate this whole thing. Right. So
we have created all the code to ingest
the data to clean it to build the gold
tables. But for now we just have done
this once. And what we would like to
achieve is we would like on a schedule
maybe each hour for example we would
like to run this whole pipeline to pull
data from the different source systems
meaning pulling data from the SQL server
that came in the last hour reading data
from the Kafka stream reading data from
the object store and then only for those
new records incrementally
pre-process them cleaning them and
creating those gold tables out of it so
that then our dashboards on top or our
applications on top they can also then
access this newly updated data. For this
we click into the jobs and pipelines and
then we create here a lakeflow job right
here. So this is the native
orchestration solution within data
bricks. It also got an update recently.
So make sure you have the new lakeflow
jobs UI on here which is currently in
preview. And here we can now stitch
basically everything together and put a
schedule on top of it. First of all,
let's select the first task right here.
So it's structured in different kind of
tasks. Here we could select the
ingestion pipeline and this would
basically bring us to creating this
whole lake for connect pipeline for the
SQL server. Again, as we have already
created this, we just select ETL
pipeline right here and we select the
demo ingestion pipeline. So if you have
watched the first part, this is what was
created by our lakeflow connect pipeline
to ingest the data from the SQL server.
So we do this and we give it a name. You
also see here you could add some
notifications. For example, if things go
wrong, you could specify some retries.
So maybe for some of the tasks you want
to retry them several times before
actually failing the whole pipeline. But
for now, we'll just leave it as is. and
we create this first task. Now here we
could also add the other ingestion tasks
such as the pipeline that we have
written to read from the stream as well
as the autoloader pipelines that we have
created to read the data from the file
system. For now let's leave it with this
ingest SQL server and next I will also
show you how to add basically the next
step. So here we are selecting again ETL
pipeline as for the bronze to silver to
gold we also created earlier in this
part we created this lakeflow
declarative pipeline to clean the data
and to join the data. So here we call
this cleaning and aggregation and we
select this data transformations
pipeline and this is pretty much how it
works. We can also now specify some
dependencies when when to actually run
this second task here. So we can say
okay only if all the previous ones
succeeded. If I would have different
separate tasks right here. I could also
say if at least one succeeded please
proceed with this here. And then we can
structure it like this. You see there
are also lots of other tasks that could
be used. So for now we were mainly using
the declarative pipelines here as a
task. But as you can see here it could
be also just simply orchestrating a
notebook, a Python script, a SQL file.
There is also this DBT integration that
could be useful. You can put in if and
else conditions within your
orchestration pipeline. You could even
do looping with this for each task right
here. And you can also even refresh a
datab bricks dashboard or a PowerBI
semantic model right from within the
pipeline. After you have set all of this
up here, what you would typically do is
you would create a schedule right here.
So you would say for example for this
kind of pipeline it is a scheduled
pipeline that I would like to trigger
every hour for example and then this
whole pipeline would be executed and
read the new data in from the source
systems incrementally process it through
all your different stages and then maybe
even publish it to a PowerBI semantic
model for example. Except from this
scheduled trigger, there is also a file
arrival trigger. And there is also
currently in preview a table trigger
that you could use. All right. And
that's already it. This is how you would
set up this whole end to end
orchestration pipeline to ingest and
process your new arriving data on a
Outro
schedule. Cool. And that was already it
for this part. So we have seen how we
can create lakeflow declarative
pipelines and use its natively built-in
data quality checks to first of all
clean our data and also to apply some
small transformations in this step from
bronze to silver to fix data types for
example and then we have also seen how
we can use those silver tables and then
create gold level materialized views on
top where we join the different tables
together but we still keep this
incremental way of working and then at
the end we have seen how we can see the
end to end lineage as well as how we can
orchestrate this whole pipeline end to
end and execute it for example on a
schedule. 