Intro
This is the very first part of an
endtoend datab bricks project where we
will be implementing a full use case
from scratch end to end leveraging tools
such as lakeflow from data bricks to
ingest data into the platform and to
process it. We will be also training a
machine learning model using the mosaic
AI functionalities and we will be also
using lots of new features within data
bricks such as datab bricks apps and
lakebase. By the end of this video
series, you should have a very good
understanding of how the different
components of data bricks work together
to deliver an end to end data and the
eye solution from the initial ingestion
to the insights at the end. This very
first video is focusing mainly on
ingesting data from a streaming data
source in this case Amazon Kinesis and
then in the following videos we will
step by step also look into the other
components. Now, let me quickly
Use Case
introduce the use case we will be
working on in this project. Imagine
you're working for a car insurance
company. With data bricks, we want to
solve two things. First, we want to
bring all data of our company together,
meaning the customer information, the
claims data, the policy data, the
telemetics data that we capture in the
cars. We want to create the single
source of truth within data bricks so
that we can run proper analytics on top.
and at the end take smarter business
decisions. Second, we want to improve
the claims process at our company.
Currently, it's super manual. So,
whenever a customer submits this claim
of a car crash, a human manually checks
everything. We want to automate that
within databicks. So, we want to
automatically verify several things such
as what was the driver's speed, right?
We got this from the telemetics
information. things like is the customer
even eligible for this refund based on
their policy and things like that and
then maybe also super interesting does
the car damage described by the customer
does it even make sense. So they upload
a picture of the car crash whenever they
submit a claim and then they
self-classify basically the severity of
this car crash. And what we want to do
is we want to train a machine learning
model based on several images of car
crashes and we want to automatically
classify their uploaded image and then
we also want to check if the
classification from our machine learning
model matches what the customer has
Simple Streaming Ingestion
described. So to make this happen, we
are building the lakehouse architecture
on data bricks. We will ingest data from
three key data sources. We will have a
SQL server holding customer policy and
claim information. We will also ingest
data from a data stream. In this case,
it's Kinesis data streams where the
telemetics data is streamed into. And we
will also ingest data directly from an
object store. In this case from Amazon
S3 where the actual images of the car
crashes are uploaded for the ingestion
as well as data quality checks and
transformations. Later on we will use
lake flow within data bricks to train
the car damage classification machine
learning model. We will use mosa and its
mlflow capabilities within data bricks
and then expose it via a model serving
endpoint. We will build standard
reporting dashboards for this insurance
company using a SQL warehouse as well as
AIBI dashboards within databicks. And we
will also make the data available
through a natural language interface
using databicks genie. And finally, we
will create a portal for the customers
to submit their claims. And we will also
have an admin view within this portal to
review all of the claims. And for that,
we are going to use a combination of
lakebase to get this low latency access
to our data as well as datab bricks apps
to build the actual front end. All
right, let's switch into data bricks and
get started here. So before we dive into
the first ingestion pipeline, let's have
a quick look how our catalog is set up.
How our unity catalog is structured
here. So we have one catalog called
smart claims def. This will be the main
catalog we will be working with and
inside there we have four key schemas.
The first one being the landing schema
where initially our files that are not
yet converted into delta format land in
our object store. Right? And then we
have the typical three layers of a
medallion architecture. We first have
our brass schema here where we will
transform our data in delta but leave it
as is. In the silver one, we will do our
first cleaning operations. We will do
some standardizations things like that.
Some data quality checks and then in the
actual gold layer we will have our
aggregated data our joint data ready to
consume by for example NBI tool. Cool.
For the first data source we would like
to ingest streaming data. In our use
case we have those teleatic sensors in
the different cars and they stream data
into Kinesis data streams. Kinesis data
streams is a managed service by AWS.
It's kind of similar to things like
Kafka where you can stream messages in
and then within data bricks to ingest it
into the Unity catalog we need to read
from the stream and create delta tables
out of that. For this we will create a
new lakeflow declarative pipeline
formerly known as DT. And all we have to
do is click on new ETL pipeline. Provide
a name here. Let's call it Kinesis
ingestion.
Let's provide the default catalog and
schema. We can now read and write from
different uh cataloges and schemas, but
this will be our default one right here.
And we select smart claims def and
browse as we would like to directly
transform the data into delta format and
store it in the bronze layer here. And
here we select start with an empty file
and we select Python as our language in
this case. We could also do that with
SQL, but for now, let's stick with
Python. And what you see here now is the
new lakeflow declarative pipeline UI.
It's kind of an IDE specifically
designed to work with Lakeflow
declarative pipelines. It's currently in
beta and it's it's super nice. You will
see in a second how the end to end
workflow looks like. Here on the left
side, we have an overview about all of
our files in this project. So let's
maybe rename this one to Kinesis simple
as we will start with an simple example
here and we're good to go. On the right
hand side you will see later on the
graph being built automatically and
visualized and on the bottom we will
later see the actual tables created by
this pipeline here and also see some
sample values to make sure we are on the
right track. Now what we want to do is
we want to read from the Kinesis stream.
So first of all I'm importing some
libraries that we will need later on and
then we are defining some Kinesis
specific configuration parameters. Here
we for example provide the stream name.
So this is the Kinesis data stream we
would like to read from. It's located in
the US East1 region and we want to read
it from the earliest position. So we
want to read the whole stream right from
the beginning. And then this part here
is also super important. So we need to
authenticate to our Kinesis data stream
from our databicks cluster. And there
are several ways to do so. But what we
would like to avoid is somewhere storing
hard-coded secret values. We also don't
want to mess up with some tokens that we
need to maintain that we need to rotate.
And for that the recommended way to do
so is going by unity catalog service
credentials. So you see here we
specified the service credential called
kinesis service credential. And this is
something I have created already. Let's
have a look in the unity catalog for
that. So on the unity catalog if we go
to credentials right here you will see
exactly this kinesis service credential.
Right. So if you would like to create
it, it's it's super straightforward. You
click here on create credential. It's
not a storage credential. It's a service
credential right here, which is supposed
to be used to access several cloud
services uh other than than storage
accounts, right? All you have to do is
provide a name as well as an AM role.
And this am role is basically allowing
us to access the Kinesis data stream. We
don't need to maintain any secrets or
rotate any tokens or anything like that
and it's all governed by the Unity
catalog which is super helpful. I don't
want to show you all of the details how
I how I set this up. I will put the
documentation in the description so you
can have a look how to create in general
those service credentials and just to
quickly maybe um see how it how it looks
within AWS. So I created this role here
called Kinesis service credential role.
I gave it the proper permissions to read
from the stream to list the shards and
and so on and so forth. It's all
documented what you need here. And then
I also provided this trust relationship
needed to our external ID which is
basically the connection to our data
bricks account. Now as we are already in
AWS let's also look into the kinesis
data stream that we are going to use. So
there is only one over here and this is
exactly this telemetics stream in US
east that we will read from now inside
databicks. All right. Now we have the
configuration set up. We can
authenticate to our stream through this
service credential right here. Now let's
look into the first implementation of
our let's say most simple code to
connect to the stream to read from it
and to write into a delta table. Here I
provided some lakeflow declarative
pipeline code for that. I'm calling the
table right here teleatics test. I'm
giving it some additional metadata which
you will also see later on in the Unity
catalog. I'm describing that this is a
parsed Kinesis data stream holding
telemetics data. In this case, it's not
parsed yet, but we will change that
later on. And it's really the most
minimal implementation how to read from
the stream and write into databicks. All
we are saying here is we are reading a
stream from the format kinesis and we
provide as the options all the kinesis
configurations that we have provided
here at the top. And now we're already
good to go. So this pipeline here is
configured as a serverless lakeflow
declarative pipeline. We could add some
additional configurations but I think
for the first test it's good to go. We
click on run pipeline and see what
happens. And there we go. Our serverless
cluster is up and running. We are
reading from the stream as you see right
here. And we have written 40 different
records into the target table. So this
is the beauty of this new DT UI over
here or the new lakeflow declarative
pipeline UI over here. You see right
away first of all the graph you can see
it alongside the code that you implement
and you also see the actual outputs
here. So you see this telematics test
table got created and we can even click
into it and see the sample data here. So
we see what was actually written into
the delta table without the need to yeah
open another tab go to Unity catalog
click on the sample values and and so on
and so forth. Now you see we have
different kind of columns. We have some
metadata sent over from the Kinesis data
stream and then we see the actual data
column here but it's still super cryptic
and the reason for that is that this is
only the bite data that we now ingested.
So we are reading the actual bytes from
the stream and as we have not performed
any kind of parsing or any kind of
implementation logic to make this proper
readable data we see only the bytes
here. So this is what we're going to
change next. We are creating a new file
Decoding and Parsing
right here and we call it kinesis
par.
The configuration we can just copy over
here and then we will make some more
adjustments to actually also parse the
records and put it into a proper
structure. So first of all we want we
don't want to look into the proper data
formats. We just want to make everything
a string. For this, we will create this
map type right here and put it into a
variable called payload schema.
And now I am ingesting here a bunch of
code. So it's a bit more than our
previous example, but this will help us
to actually parse our data set right
here. So we are again creating a
lakeflow declarative pipeline table.
This time we call it telematics advanced
or let's just call it telematics. We
again provide some comments table
properties and we also again just load
the raw stream. But now you see we are
making some more adjustments to actually
parse it. The most important thing here
is we are casting it right here to
string. So basically we are making the
bytes that we have seen earlier right
here readable in a proper string format.
And we create this new column called the
raw JSON. Right here we are again
selecting all of the additional metadata
from the Kinesis data stream. And we
create a new column called decoded data
where we actually even take it a step
further. So we are not just pasting all
the data that we converted right here
into one column. No, we are actually
decoding it first of all by using this
from JSON function and then we are
creating proper columns to our target
table. First of all, we will have one
column called stream metadata where we
put all of the Kinesis specific stuff.
But then more importantly here we are
having the actual data like the speed
which will be super important later on
in our analysis. the latitude, the
longitude, the event timestamp, the
chases number. So the actual data
basically will be put into proper
columns now in our target table. So if
we execute this one right here, we will
see that the output will now look way
better for us. You see we're getting a
new table right here. This time called
telematics. Again, it's reading those 40
records that are already sitting inside
the stream. And now if we click into the
table we see okay now we properly have
our columns right we have our latitude
we have our longitude we have the speed
and we basically parsed everything we
transformed it from the bite format into
proper strings and then we even further
separated it from this big JSON chunk
into different kind of columns in our
target table. Now you already saw
whenever I'm executing this pipeline
here, it's actually reading from the
stream and retrieving all the new data
that was inserted there compared to the
last run. And this is also the beauty of
the lakeflow declarative pipeline. So we
did not have to specify any
checkpointing location and stuff like
that. All of that is abstracted away for
us. And we also see streaming does not
necessarily have to be a 24/7
running pipeline. It can also be
executed in a batch mode like like we're
doing it right now. Right? We could also
change this. So we could go into the
configuration and we can say okay it's
not a triggered pipeline anymore but
it's like a continuous pipeline. And
then this would actually run in
streaming mode and all the time reading
from our streaming source and ingesting
it in real time into our target tables.
So let's try this out as well. Let's
make this a streaming pipeline. And then
let me under the hood send a few records
in real time into the stream by
executing a script I have.
There we go. Scripts started. And you
see it's now writing records actually.
So this is basically my script sending
records every uh I think 3 seconds or
something like that. And you see the
records being updated here in real time.
And you can even click on the actual
declarative pipeline and also have this
UI if you're more familiar to to that
one and see also here for the different
streams. So in this case we are now
continuously running the simple stream
right here where we're not pausing the
records as well as the more advanced
stream and both of them ingest data in
real time as this is now a continuously
running pipeline. Now I stopped it.
Let's quickly check in the Unity catalog
how things look like. We are looking
into the brows and then we see here
those two tables. We can delete the
second one as this was only for
demonstration purposes. But then for the
actual telematics table, we have now
ingested our streaming data from our
Kinesis data source. We see it's in
proper columns right here. We can uh
look in the sample values. And here we
see again what we also saw in the
lakeflow declarative pipelines UI. Cool.
Let's now continue with the other data
Outro
sources. This was the first part of this
end to end data bricks tutorial. In the
next parts, we will focus on other
ingestion sources. We will look into SQL
server and ingest it using LakeFlow
connect as well as ingesting data from
the object store using autoloader.