Intro
The first step in every unified data
platform is ingesting data from the
different source systems. One of the key
data sources is often a relational
database such as a Postgress or a SQL
server where you need to pull data from
and load it into your target analytical
system such as data bricks. Due to
performance reasons and maybe real-time
requirements, you don't want to load the
full snapshot of the database multiple
times per day. Instead, you often would
want to incrementally ingest only the
changes from the source database into
the target system. In the past,
achieving this often meant stitching
together multiple different systems such
as DESium, Kafka, and so on. But in this
hands-on video, I will show you how you
can do that very simply using databicks
and lakeflow connect. We will build a
pipeline in databicks to ingest all the
inserts, updates, and deletes from a SQL
server into databicks. First by doing
all the needed configurations on the
database site itself and then inside
datab bricks we will create this
pipeline to incrementally ingest this
change data feed and stream it into a
delta table. This video is the second
part actually of an end toend data
bricks project where we are building an
end toend data and platform for a smart
insurance company. If you want to know
all the details and all the context
around this use case, I would recommend
watching the first video in this series
where I explain everything and where we
will also ingest streaming data into
data bricks. Now let's jump right into
data bricks and get started. All right,
Lakeflow Connect Setup Part 1
now we are in data bricks and we want to
ingest the data. Right, currently our
catalog and schema setup looks like
this. We have this smart claims defaf
catalog which is our main catalog and we
want to ingest the data in the SQL
server into this browse schema right
here. Currently we have only one table
here. This is from the last video. But
now we want to ingest three more tables
which currently sit in the SQL server.
This is the claims data, the customer
data and the policy data. For this, all
we have to do is go over here into the
data ingestion tab and then at the top
you see those datab bricks native
connectors. And today we are going to
use the SQL server one right here. If
you don't see it in your account, you
need to enable it in the preview
settings of the workspace and then you
can go ahead and click into it. I would
say the setup is very straightforward.
We need two components of this ingestion
pipeline. First of all, we need an
ingestion gateway. This is what we are
giving a name for right here. Let's call
this demo ingestion gateway.
There we go. Then we select here the
location for the staging ingestion data.
So what is this all about? Right. So
this ingestion gateway, this is the
first component of LakeFlow connect. And
this will be the actual compute that is
used to connect to the transaction log
to the change data feed from your source
database in this case SQL server and it
will read from there all the insert
update and delete operations performed
on the database and it will write it
into a unity catalog volume and this
volume location is what we specify here.
So if we select our catalog right here
the smart claims dev for the schema we
would select the the landing schema
right here. This is the first part of
lakeflow connect. The next part is what
you see here. This is the ingestion
pipeline and this is what will actually
do the upsert operations into our target
bronze table. Right? So this is a
separate pipeline. We have the ingestion
gateway reading in all the transaction
logs, all the inserts, updates, deletes,
pushing it into a volume and then we can
basically schedule this ingestion
pipeline which will read from this
volume and apply all the inserts,
updates, deletes into a target delta
table. So let's call this demo ingestion
pipeline. And here we now need to select
a connection as you can see here. So
this is basically a Unity catalog object
that we created beforehand where we
specify the host right where we want to
connect to as well as the credentials to
connect into the target system. Here we
already have this one. If we click into
it we will be routed to the Unity
catalog and we will see that we created
here this connection which is a SQL
server connection. We provided the URL,
the host, the port to connect to as well
as the username and the password to
authenticate to that. Right? All right.
So now before we create the pipeline and
actually continue, there are a couple of
things that needs to happen on the
source database side. So we need to
enable a few configurations. This is
typically done by a database
administrator to make sure first of all
this transaction log is even written by
the database and to make sure we can
read from it. For this, let's quickly
have a look how our database looks like
and what we need to enable exactly. All
right. Now, we are in data grip. Data
SQL Server Setup
grip is kind of a database IDE. And here
we will have a look on our data in the
database as well as the configurations
that we need to make. First of all, I
mentioned we have three different tables
that we want to ingest. This is also
what you see here on the left hand side.
So I connected to my SQL server which is
hosted on RDS and we see the free tables
here and if we query them we can also
have a look how they how they look like
for the customer one you see we have
like the customer ID a date of birth and
so on and so forth. The policy also
holds some kind of data related to the
different policies of the customers and
then the claim data holds the extra
information about the different claims
performed by the customers. Now to
ingest this data with lakeflow connect
we need to do a couple of things as I
mentioned and this is what we're going
to do next. First thing we have to do
and by the way you find all of this also
in the datab bricks documentation is to
enable the change tracking on the
database itself as well as on all of the
tables. For this we can execute this
command. We alter the table claims defaf
and we set the change tracking on. In
this case we have already done this in
advance. And then for each of the
different tables we are altering them
and enable change tracking for claim as
well as for the customer table right
here. This is the first step. After we
have enabled the change tracking we need
to enable CDC as well again on the
database as well as on each of the
different tables. For an RDS SQL server
database the syntax looks like that. So
we execute this command for the database
and then for each of the tables again we
need to separately enable CDC on the
table itself. So we do this for the
policy for the claim and also for the
customer table. This is already almost
it. There is one more step. There is a
script provided in the database
documentation to set up the DDL capture
and the schema evolution on the
database. So for this all we have to do
is to click on the database click on SQL
scripts and then we run a SQL script and
here we select the one that we have
downloaded from the datab bricks
documentation. All right and now we're
good to go. So we can switch back to
datab bricks and here we can continue
Lakeflow Connect Setup Part 2
with the setup of our ingestion
pipeline. Right. So we specified the
catalog here and we specified the
connection. We can click on create
pipeline and continue. And now what is
going to happen? So this will take
typically a couple of minutes because in
the background now there is a VM set up
for the ingestion gateway. So this is
the one that will be used now to read
from this transaction log from the
database from the SQL server using this
connection that we have provided and
we'll write it into a volume which will
then be picked up by the ingestion
pipeline. afterwards. Right? So here we
need to wait a couple of minutes. This
is currently not available yet in
serless. So this will be always a
classic compute VM. You can also check
it in your underlying AWS or Azure
account. So let's wait for that and then
we can proceed with the next steps.
Cool. After a few minutes, you will see
something like this. So now we are
connected to our SQL server through the
ingestion gateway and we basically see
an overview of our database of the
schema and of the different tables that
we have and now we can select which
tables we actually want to ingest. In
this case we want to ingest the claim
customer as well as the policy. So we
select all of them and then we click on
next right here. Now we have to select
where to put basically the destination
tables. So inside datrix we want to put
it into this browse schema right here.
So we select save and continue. We see
the ingestion pipeline was saved. And
now the pipeline configuration is
validated. There we go. We are on the
very last step. Here we can provide some
additional configurations for this
ingestion pipeline itself. So here for
example we can add a schedule so that
the ingestion pipeline is executed every
hour for example. So again we have those
two parts right? We have the ingestion
gateway which is running all the time
and getting the changes from the source
system and putting it into a volume in
data bricks. And then we have the
ingestion pipeline which is then using
the inserts, updates, deletes from the
volume and inserting it into a target
table in our bronze layer. And this is
basically the ingestion pipeline
configuration. Here we can click on save
and run pipeline and then we get
directly moved into the databicks jobs
and pipelines UI. And here the job is
executed. All right. And there we go.
The pipeline is set up as well. And now
it basically starts to ingest the data
into the three different target tables.
You see it's doing this in parallel for
the claim, customer, and policy table.
And that is already it. So all three
tables have been ingested. So you see
there were 13,000 records for the claim
table upserted. for the customer it were
around 7,000 and 12,000 for the policy.
Now let's check if this is actually
true. So we go to the catalog and we
click on our smart claims def cat
catalog and first of all inside the
landing one we should see something
exactly here. We see this volume which
was created to initially by the
ingestion gateway insert a snapshot in
this case of the source database. So as
this was our very first run it did a
snapshot right of the source database
and now for the next executions it will
only track and only insert the recent
changes the inserts updates deletes
right now we see next to the telematics
one that we already had before we see
the claim customer and policy tables
they're all streaming tables because
under the hood the ingestion gateway as
well as the ingestion pipeline is
running a lakeflow declarative pipeline
formerly known as DT therefore it also
creates streaming tables and we see the
schema here matches the one that we had
in the source database and if we click
into the sample data we can actually see
data right here right so it all worked
so what we can do now to check if if
Test Incremental Load
also the incremental updates work
because currently just basically
inserted the snapshot right but now we
are interested in the incremental
changes that happened during the day so
what we can do is we can switch back to
our data grip and here we can for each
of the different tables. We can
basically execute an insert and update
and delete and see if it's propagated
properly to our target delta tables. Now
let's do this right. So we will insert
to the policy. We will insert this
record right here. There we go. One row
affected. Then we will update from the
claim table one of the claims to change
the incident severity that is set there.
So we execute this one. And as a last
step, we will also delete one record
from the customer table. So let's delete
this one right here. And now we also see
one row affected. Now let's switch into
datab bricks and look into how to ingest
now those incremental changes into datab
bricks. In data bricks, all we have to
do now is to execute this ingestion
pipeline. Before we do that, let's
quickly check here. I prepared a few SQL
statements to make sure that we actually
apply the changes. Right? So if we query
the customer, this is the one that we
just deleted in the source system. We
see here it still exists. For the claim,
we see that if we query that the
severity type is set to total loss. We
change that on the source database. And
for the policy, we ingested the new
record with this policy number. But here
in databicks, it does not exist yet,
right? because we have not yet applied
all the changes from the source system.
Now when we execute this pipeline here,
we can do this by just starting this
pipeline right here. And now it will
basically update all the tables based on
the most recent changes in our source
database. Perfect. Here we already
basically see that it worked. We see
three changes were recognized. For the
claims one, we have an upsert. For the
customer one, we see a delete. And for
the policy, we also see an upsert. Now
if we reexecute our three statements
right here. Now if we start maybe with
the policy one, we see this record was
successfully inserted. So it was not
there before. For the claims table, we
change the severity type here. So if we
execute this, we see here the new
incident severity that was set to minor
damage. And for the customer that we
deleted, we should now see no records
here. And if we execute this exactly, we
see no records returned. So we
successfully basically executed all the
changes on the source system. Awesome.
That is already it. We have implemented
Outro
successfully an incremental pipeline to
track first of all all the inserts,
updates, deletes that happen on the
source system. I've provided you all the
configurations that you have to do on
the source database. In this case, the
SQL server. We have created this
ingestion gateway as part of the
lakeflow connect to read all those
changes and to put it into a volume in
data bricks and then also this lakeflow
connect ingestion pipeline will read all
those changes and apply it whenever we
execute it to the target systems. So
this way now we have a fully functional
higherformant change data capture
pipeline and we have set all of this up
within minutes using only LakeFlow
connect within data bricks and I think
this is a super powerful solution right
here.