Intro
While there has been lots of hype around
generative AI and foundational models,
there are still lots of use cases for
traditional machine learning which make
it into production. Bringing machine
learning models into production can be a
struggle and that's why data bricks back
then created this project called ML flow
which is a framework to build
productionready machine learning
projects with its tracking and all the
machine learning life cycle
functionalities. To build a machine
learning model within data bricks but
also anywhere else you need to do a
couple of things. First of all you need
to ingest and pre-process the data.
Often you start with exploring the data
first in a notebook. Then you start your
first experiments to build the first
models and those you would ideally like
to track. Afterwards, once you're happy
with the result, you typically register
this model in a model registry to then
version it there and use this also as
the central place to pull your model
from to do either batch inference or
real-time inference. Additionally, you
often also want to have things like a
feature store and also capabilities to
monitor your model in production to
automatically, for example, detect drift
and to kick off automatically a new
retraining job. All of this is possible
within databicks and its native ML flow
capabilities. And in this video, we will
work on a computer vision project where
we are basically fine-tuning a ResNet
deep learning model to classify the
severity of car crashes. So, we want to
upload a picture and then our machine
learning model should give us an
indication if this damage that we see on
this car crash is rather a small damage,
it's a big damage or it's maybe a total
crash. This is actually the fifth part
of an end toend datab bricks project
where we are currently working on to
build a smart claims application. So if
you would like to understand all the
context and the use case, I would
recommend to check out the other four
videos. But now let's get started and
move right into databicks. Now we are
Training the Model
here within databicks and let's have a
quick look into our catalog structure
and what kind of data we have already
here. In the last parts of this video
series, we have created this landing
bronze, silver, and gold schema where we
ingested data from various data sources.
We built those bronze data tables out of
it. We cleaned it and put it into the
silver schema. And then we even built
like aggregations and joints on top and
put this into the gold schema. In this
video, we will focus on this training
images data set which will be the input
for our machine learning model that we
train and then we register it into our
gold schema and then we will first of
all do batch inference on top of this
machine learning model as well as
creating this realtime inference
endpoint to then use it in our
downstream application. For this we
create a new notebook right here. And
for the cluster that we're going to use,
we will create a new cluster. And this
time we will use a machine learning
cluster as it has lots of those
frameworks and libraries that we need
already pre-installed. We give it a name
and we create it. All right. First of
all, we install a couple of libraries
right here. And then we can already get
started with first of all exploring the
data that we have and then making some
pre-processing steps so that we can then
train the machine learning model. First
of all the data that we are going to
read in is coming from the silver schema
and the data is stored in training
images. So if you want to know how it
did land here, how we ingested it from
object store, then check out the
previous parts of this video series. Now
we would like to have a look into it.
All right, there we go. So we see we
have in our training images table, we
have the path where the actual image is
stored. We have some time data. We have
the length. And then most importantly in
the actual content, we have this binary
here representing the image right here
in the notebook. It's even visualized.
But this is just a binary that we have
stored here. And we have the label
right. So this is our training data set.
Therefore, we have labels for the
different car crashes. And we will use
these labels to train the machine
learning model. And in our
pre-processing step in our last part, we
basically extracted this label out of
the path right here as the names always
have the label in it. Right? Cool. Now
we can go ahead and first of all we
would like to resize the image. For this
we are implementing a small function
called resize image UDF. UDF stands for
userdefined function. And we do this
because we will take as a baseline a
ResNet deep learning model and we will
fine-tune it. And this model was trained
on image sizes of 224.
And therefore we need to resize all of
our input images to basically match this
preferred size for the machine learning
model so that we can get better results
out of it. So we create this function
here. I don't want to go into all of the
specifics. You will find the code at the
end of the course in a git repository.
And then we are using this function and
apply it to the training data frame
overwriting the column content and
applying this resize image UDF function
on the actual previous content. And then
we store it in a new delta table called
training images resized. And then we
simply execute this right here. Right
afterwards, we will also quickly double
check our output table and see if it was
created properly. And there we go. You
see it looks very similar. The only
thing that changed basically is that we
have transformed the content to the
proper image sizes. All right. Now our
input training data is ready. Now to
train a machine learning model within
data bricks leveraging MLflow as the
machine learning life cycle management
framework we will create first a new
MLflow experiment. For this we click
over here click into custom model
training and give it a name. In this
case let's call it image claims
classifier. We click on create right
here. And there we go. We have this
empty experiment created. Now back in
our notebook, we are setting the
experiment for MLflow by specifying the
path of the experiment that we just
created. And then there is one more
step. So we transform our resized images
into this data set variable to convert
it into a format that our machine
learning model can understand. And then
we split the data set into a training
and into a test portion to use this for
the machine learning model training run.
Now we need to make a few more
transformations. So even though we
resized the image already to the size of
224 earlier, our current data set still
has just those JPEG bytes basically and
neural networks do not understand this.
they work with tensors and on top of
that our resonet model that we are going
to use expects the input to be
normalized. So this is what we have to
do as well. Therefore we now do all of
this right here. So first of all we are
using as I mentioned already the restnet
pre-trained model which we would like to
fine-tune and this is from a hugging
face basically and then we do all of
those transformations that I just
mentioned. All right. So let us execute
this now as well. So now we have loaded
this pre-trained image classification
model that was already trained on lots
of image data. Now we want to fine-tune
it basically on our data. For this we
are loading it right here and we are
giving it the labels that we expect as
an output for our classification. In our
case, the labels are the classification
of the accident severity. So, is it a
minor, is it a major damage and so on
and so forth. And then we can finally
get started with the finetuning. Right
now, typically in a more production
scenario, we would also have this
hyperparameter tuning step here in
between now. But for demo purposes, we
keep it simple. So, we provided the
training arguments here. And then there
is one more step before we start the
fine-tuning. So we basically wrap the
model in this format that you can see
right here. So that later on we can
first of all easily register it as an ML
flow model in the Unity catalog model
registry. And we can also easily then
load it back and do inference on top of
it. Perfect. And now we can finally go
ahead again. I will not go through all
of this code here. But essentially we
are now starting our fine-tuning model
training run here. And um the most
important thing is that we are using ML
flow here to run this experiment. We
also give it a name right here. And we
are also logging all of the training
parameters so that everything is tracked
within this MLflow experiment. So that
also afterwards we can really easily
understand how we came up with this
model result. So what kind of parameters
were used, what kind of data was used,
the hyperparameters and so on and so
forth. Everything is locked within ML
flow and uh now we can go ahead and
start this training run over here. And
you will see it will kick off an ML flow
experiment. So if we click over here, we
see that within our experiment that we
created earlier, now this run is being
kicked off and we can already click into
it. It will take a while to complete,
but you already see lots of parameters
that are used in this training run will
be tracked here. And this is super
important to not lose track of what
you're doing in your experiments. So
that later on if you bring a model in
production, you know exactly what kind
of model you bring into production, what
the parameters were, what it was trained
on, what kind of model was used, and so
on and so forth. And there we go. The
experiment successfully run. And now
again to elaborate once more on the
experiment tracking within data rigs.
You see all those information here,
right? You even see like the notebook
that was used and and much more
information. Now what you would like to
do is to register this model that was
created out of this experiment into the
unity catalog within databicks to first
of all govern it also through the unity
catalog and also this is the way how you
later on make it accessible for
inference. Now let's do this. Let's go
back to our notebook and here we
register a new model using
mlflow.register model. So this is
registering it in our unity catalog and
we specify the name. So we will store
this in the gold schema and call it
claims damage level. And we will also
give it an alias that this is the pro
model. And now let's execute this. And
yeah one more thing that we forgot here.
So we need to specify that unity catalog
is basically our model registry. And
this worked out. So now let's open the
Unity catalog
and here within the gold schema we see
we have now a machine learning model
called claims damage level. We see this
alias that we provided with prot and we
see this is the version number one. And
if we click into it we can also see that
this was produced out of this training
run over here. We have now successfully
trained our machine learning model and
we registered it in the Unity catalog.
Now let's test it out. To test it, let's
Batch & Real-Time Inference
do some batch inference using this
model. To do batch inference within data
bricks, what you can do is you can
register a spark udf. So we create this
new variable here predict damage UDF and
then we specify here that we want to use
this model that we just created and
registered in the Unity catalog. What we
can do now is we can
create a new table in the gold schema
called damage predictions. And for this
we use our silver initial input images.
We add a new column called damage
prediction and then here we are
leveraging the UDF basically and
therefore we do batch inference using
spark and now if we execute this cool
that was successfully executed now let's
check out the output table
and here we see exactly the same table
that we had earlier but now we have
included the damage predictions
basically right so you see the predicted
labels right over here and we already
See, some labels are wrong, some are
right. And to get a better idea of how
it performed, let's create this results
table right here. And then we will plot
a confusion matrix
right over here.
And then we will see how our model
performed. There we go. So we see it it
did okay, right? We also did not provide
that much um image data. We did not do
proper pre-processing, proper
hyperparameter tuning and stuff like
that. We just used this as an example.
And you see here it already recognized
correctly most of the images. So it put
16 into major which were actually major
damages. Uh 13 into minor which were
actually minor and then also 13 into
okay which were actually okay. And um
and we see here some problems right
where the for example the prediction was
okay but it was actually labeled as a
minor damage within our input data set.
Also we can write from here serve this
model now in a real time inference
endpoint right where we provide now a
name for it. We specify the model and
then we also specify the hardware where
this model serving endpoint should run
on. So is it like a CPU? Is it a big GPU
for example? And then we uh just click
here on create and then we have a
real-time model serving endpoint. And
this we have already done. So if we
click right here into this uh real-time
serving endpoint, we see it's ready to
use. And now we can actually use this
endpoint here in our application that
we're about to build to do real time
inference. So as soon as the customer is
uploading their image for the claim, we
can in real time classify it and compare
it against whatever the customer is
claiming the severity of the images.
Cool. So this is the first part what we
wanted to do. So our goal is to build
this smart claims process. Right now, we
have a machine learning model that we
can use to classify automatically the
images that our customers upload when
they submit their claims for their
accidents. But on top of that, we also
want to check some additional things
before we proceed with the decision if
you want to refund
automatically to the customer or if you
want to do some additional manual
checks. So one of the checks we do is of
course this machine learning model. When
the customer submits their claim, they
specify how they themselves would
classify the severity of this car crash
and then we run this machine learning
model and compare basically if this
matches what the customer is saying,
right? If the customer is saying this is
a major damage, they want to have
$100,000 out of us. But actually our
machine learning model is saying okay
this is just a very small damage
basically and it classifies it as like
okay or minor right then this does not
match and it would require an additional
Outro
check. All right and that was already it
for this part. So we have seen how we
can use data bricks to build very easily
within a notebook a machine learning
model and most importantly how we can
use ML flow to first of all to track our
experiments and also then how to
register it in the unity catalog and
then how to do inference on top of it.